README.md, before:

# SBG-CGC course 2018

[![Join the chat at https://gitter.im/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018](https://badges.gitter.im/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018.svg)](https://gitter.im/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge&utm_content=badge)

IARC course on analyzing TCGA data in the SevenBridges Genomics [Cancer Genomics Cloud](http://www.cancergenomicscloud.org) (SBG-CGC). Slides are in the slide folder.

## Description of the course

__Learning objectives__  
After completing this workshop, participants will be able to run their own computational tools on the cloud using TCGA data using:
* the SevenBridges web interface to select and retrieve TCGA data,
* Docker and DockerHub to build and store containers to deploy their own
computational tools,
* the Common Workflow Language (CWL) to describe the pipelines to run,
* the SevenBridges R api to run automatically reproducible analyses.  

__Main topics__
* Introduction to Cloud computing
* Introduction to Docker and DockerHub
* SevenBridges R API and web interface
* TCGA data analysis

## Agenda and slides

__Wednesday 28 February__  
09:00-10:00 [Introduction to cloud computing](slides/01-introduction) and the [SevenBridges architecture](slides/02-architecture.pdf)  
10:00-10:30 [Introduction to TCGA](slides/03-TCGA.pdf) data  
10:30-11:00 [Break](https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/490955281744920576/bSgZgrf5_400x400.jpeg)  
11:00-11:30 Introduction to the SevenBridges [web interface](slides/04-web_interface.pdf) to run analyses  
11:30-12:30 Practical application: run your first basic analysis in the cloud  

__Thursday 1 March__  
09:00-09:30 Introduction to Docker and DockerHub  
09:30-11:00 Practical application: building your own Docker container and run it in the cloud  
11:00-11:30 [Break](https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/490955281744920576/bSgZgrf5_400x400.jpeg)  
11:30-12:30 Introduction to the R api and the CWL language  

__Friday 2 March__  
09:00-12:30 Practical application: running your own practical project in the cloud using the R api, CWL and Docker.  
12:30-14:00 [Lunch Break](http://www.kisaanseva.com/images/logo.png)  
14:00-17:00 Practical application: running your own practical project in the cloud using the R api, CWL and Docker.  

## Gitter Chat

A [gitter channel](https://gitter.im/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018) is open for the course. This will allow participants to discuss on their projects but also to ask any question regarding the course.

## Laptop setup

Laptops use Ubuntu 16.04.

Docker is already installed. If you are curious, here is how to install it on Docker [website](https://docs.docker.com/install/linux/docker-ce/ubuntu/).

If you need a good text editor, [Atom](https://atom.io) is also installed.

Participants would need to install R and Rstudio. One possibility is to use the steps proposed in [this gist](https://gist.github.com/mGalarnyk/41c887e921e712baf86fecc507b3afc7).  
Caution:  
  * please change the version of rstudio installed into the last one: 1.1.423
  * you would probably need to add a key with `sudo apt-key adv --keyserver keyserver.ubuntu.com --recv-keys THE_KEY`.  
  * two more packages are needed, execute: `sudo apt install libcurl4-openssl-dev` and `sudo apt-get install libssl-dev`

R package sevenbridges-r is also needed:
```
source("https://bioconductor.org/biocLite.R")
biocLite("sevenbridges")
```

## Useful links
- Seven Bridges [Cancer Genomics Cloud](http://www.cancergenomicscloud.org)
- [CGC documentation](https://docs.cancergenomicscloud.org/docs)
- Cancer Genomics Cloud publication in [Cancer Research ](http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/77/21/e3.long)
- [Awesome TCGA](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/awesome-TCGA): a curated list of TCGA resources maintained by the [IARCbioinfo organization](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo). The most useful ones for this course are:
    - [Genomic Data Commons (GDC) data portal](https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov): the official entry point to download TCGA data.
    - [GDC data release notes](https://docs.gdc.cancer.gov/Data/Release_Notes/Data_Release_Notes/)
    - [List of cohorts with sample sizes](https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/projects?filters=~%28op~%27and~content~%28~%28op~%27in~content~%28field~%27projects.program.name~value~%28~%27TCGA%29%29%29%29%29)
    - For each cohorts you can download clinical and biospecimen data [here](https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/projects/TCGA-LUAD) for example for LUAD.
    - [TCGA barcode](https://wiki.nci.nih.gov/display/TCGA/TCGA+barcode)
    - [TCGA code tables](https://gdc.cancer.gov/resources-tcga-users/tcga-code-tables)
    - [TCGA data dictionary](https://docs.gdc.cancer.gov/Data_Dictionary/viewer/#?_top=1)
    - [MAF file format](https://docs.gdc.cancer.gov/Data/File_Formats/MAF_Format/) description
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com) and [DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com)

## Projects

__Important__: your CGC token gives full access to your CGC account, including the protected TCGA data if you have access to it. This is like your username and password. This means that you should never share it with anyone, and only keep it in a secure location (not a USB key, a non-secure computer or a laptop leaving IARC).

Main steps to think about:
- Find which software you want to run.
- Find on which TCGA data you want to run it.
- Try to run it locally if possible.
- Build a Docker container and try to run the analysis in the container.
- Create a Dockerfile and host it on this github repository in your project folder.
- Create an associated automated build on Docker Hub in the [iarcbioinfo organization](https://hub.docker.com/u/iarcbioinfo/). See this example to specify the [folder of your Dockerfile](https://hub.docker.com/r/iarcbioinfo/sbg-cgc_course2018_project3/~/settings/automated-builds/).
- Create a project on the CGC.
- Add the TCGA data files you will need in your project.
- Create an App on the CGC that is using your docker container hosted on Docker Hub (use the web interface or write your own CWL code).
- Create a Task to run your App on your files and run it (use the web interface or the R API).

For each project, we have opened an issue to discuss on, and add a folder to host the code.  

Project 1: needlestack variant calling. [Issue](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018/issues/1). [Code](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018/tree/master/project1-needlestack).

Project 2: neutral tumor evolution. [Issue](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018/issues/2). [Code](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018/tree/master/project2-neutrality).

Project 3: cell populations from RNA-seq. [Issue](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018/issues/3). [Code](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018/tree/master/project3-RNAseq-cellpop).

## Tips and tricks

### Add public reference files to a project

Through the [web interface](https://cgc.sbgenomics.com/public/files#q), choose the file and copy to your project.  

You can also do this easily with the R client for the API:
```
a$copyFile(id = a$public_file(name = "Homo_sapiens_assembly38.fasta", exact = TRUE)$id, project = p$id)
a$copyFile(id = a$public_file(name = "Homo_sapiens_assembly38.fasta.fai", exact = TRUE)$id, project = p$id)
```
You can use the interface to get the precise name of the file you need.  

### Create your docker container

A good starting point it to run the base container on your machine (`docker run`) and then to interactively install the software you need in the container. Keep note of the commands you use and then create a Dockerfile with them. Once done try to build from your docker file using `docker build`. See the [docker tutorial](/demo_code/docker_demo.md) for more details.

Commit message:

add API query in the readme

README.md, after:

# SBG-CGC course 2018

[![Join the chat at https://gitter.im/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018](https://badges.gitter.im/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018.svg)](https://gitter.im/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge&utm_content=badge)

IARC course on analyzing TCGA data in the SevenBridges Genomics [Cancer Genomics Cloud](http://www.cancergenomicscloud.org) (SBG-CGC). Slides are in the slide folder.

## Description of the course

__Learning objectives__  
After completing this workshop, participants will be able to run their own computational tools on the cloud using TCGA data using:
* the SevenBridges web interface to select and retrieve TCGA data,
* Docker and DockerHub to build and store containers to deploy their own
computational tools,
* the Common Workflow Language (CWL) to describe the pipelines to run,
* the SevenBridges R api to run automatically reproducible analyses.  

__Main topics__
* Introduction to Cloud computing
* Introduction to Docker and DockerHub
* SevenBridges R API and web interface
* TCGA data analysis

## Agenda and slides

__Wednesday 28 February__  
09:00-10:00 [Introduction to cloud computing](slides/01-introduction) and the [SevenBridges architecture](slides/02-architecture.pdf)  
10:00-10:30 [Introduction to TCGA](slides/03-TCGA.pdf) data  
10:30-11:00 [Break](https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/490955281744920576/bSgZgrf5_400x400.jpeg)  
11:00-11:30 Introduction to the SevenBridges [web interface](slides/04-web_interface.pdf) to run analyses  
11:30-12:30 Practical application: run your first basic analysis in the cloud  

__Thursday 1 March__  
09:00-09:30 Introduction to Docker and DockerHub  
09:30-11:00 Practical application: building your own Docker container and run it in the cloud  
11:00-11:30 [Break](https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/490955281744920576/bSgZgrf5_400x400.jpeg)  
11:30-12:30 Introduction to the R api and the CWL language  

__Friday 2 March__  
09:00-12:30 Practical application: running your own practical project in the cloud using the R api, CWL and Docker.  
12:30-14:00 [Lunch Break](http://www.kisaanseva.com/images/logo.png)  
14:00-17:00 Practical application: running your own practical project in the cloud using the R api, CWL and Docker.  

## Gitter Chat

A [gitter channel](https://gitter.im/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018) is open for the course. This will allow participants to discuss on their projects but also to ask any question regarding the course.

## Laptop setup

Laptops use Ubuntu 16.04.

Docker is already installed. If you are curious, here is how to install it on Docker [website](https://docs.docker.com/install/linux/docker-ce/ubuntu/).

If you need a good text editor, [Atom](https://atom.io) is also installed.

Participants would need to install R and Rstudio. One possibility is to use the steps proposed in [this gist](https://gist.github.com/mGalarnyk/41c887e921e712baf86fecc507b3afc7).  
Caution:  
  * please change the version of rstudio installed into the last one: 1.1.423
  * you would probably need to add a key with `sudo apt-key adv --keyserver keyserver.ubuntu.com --recv-keys THE_KEY`.  
  * two more packages are needed, execute: `sudo apt install libcurl4-openssl-dev` and `sudo apt-get install libssl-dev`

R package sevenbridges-r is also needed:
```
source("https://bioconductor.org/biocLite.R")
biocLite("sevenbridges")
```

## Useful links
- Seven Bridges [Cancer Genomics Cloud](http://www.cancergenomicscloud.org)
- [CGC documentation](https://docs.cancergenomicscloud.org/docs)
- Cancer Genomics Cloud publication in [Cancer Research ](http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/77/21/e3.long)
- [Awesome TCGA](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/awesome-TCGA): a curated list of TCGA resources maintained by the [IARCbioinfo organization](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo). The most useful ones for this course are:
    - [Genomic Data Commons (GDC) data portal](https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov): the official entry point to download TCGA data.
    - [GDC data release notes](https://docs.gdc.cancer.gov/Data/Release_Notes/Data_Release_Notes/)
    - [List of cohorts with sample sizes](https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/projects?filters=~%28op~%27and~content~%28~%28op~%27in~content~%28field~%27projects.program.name~value~%28~%27TCGA%29%29%29%29%29)
    - For each cohorts you can download clinical and biospecimen data [here](https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/projects/TCGA-LUAD) for example for LUAD.
    - [TCGA barcode](https://wiki.nci.nih.gov/display/TCGA/TCGA+barcode)
    - [TCGA code tables](https://gdc.cancer.gov/resources-tcga-users/tcga-code-tables)
    - [TCGA data dictionary](https://docs.gdc.cancer.gov/Data_Dictionary/viewer/#?_top=1)
    - [MAF file format](https://docs.gdc.cancer.gov/Data/File_Formats/MAF_Format/) description
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com) and [DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com)

## Projects

__Important__: your CGC token gives full access to your CGC account, including the protected TCGA data if you have access to it. This is like your username and password. This means that you should never share it with anyone, and only keep it in a secure location (not a USB key, a non-secure computer or a laptop leaving IARC).

Main steps to think about:
- Find which software you want to run.
- Find on which TCGA data you want to run it.
- Try to run it locally if possible.
- Build a Docker container and try to run the analysis in the container.
- Create a Dockerfile and host it on this github repository in your project folder.
- Create an associated automated build on Docker Hub in the [iarcbioinfo organization](https://hub.docker.com/u/iarcbioinfo/). See this example to specify the [folder of your Dockerfile](https://hub.docker.com/r/iarcbioinfo/sbg-cgc_course2018_project3/~/settings/automated-builds/).
- Create a project on the CGC.
- Add the TCGA data files you will need in your project.
- Create an App on the CGC that is using your docker container hosted on Docker Hub (use the web interface or write your own CWL code).
- Create a Task to run your App on your files and run it (use the web interface or the R API).

For each project, we have opened an issue to discuss on, and add a folder to host the code.  

Project 1: needlestack variant calling. [Issue](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018/issues/1). [Code](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018/tree/master/project1-needlestack).

Project 2: neutral tumor evolution. [Issue](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018/issues/2). [Code](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018/tree/master/project2-neutrality).

Project 3: cell populations from RNA-seq. [Issue](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018/issues/3). [Code](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018/tree/master/project3-RNAseq-cellpop).

## Tips and tricks

### Add public reference files to a project

Through the [web interface](https://cgc.sbgenomics.com/public/files#q), choose the file and copy to your project.  

You can also do this easily with the R client for the API:
```
a$copyFile(id = a$public_file(name = "Homo_sapiens_assembly38.fasta", exact = TRUE)$id, project = p$id)
a$copyFile(id = a$public_file(name = "Homo_sapiens_assembly38.fasta.fai", exact = TRUE)$id, project = p$id)
```
You can use the interface to get the precise name of the file you need.  

### Use the R API client to query data and add it to a project

[This R script](https://github.com/IARCbioinfo/SBG-CGC_course2018/blob/master/demo_code/R/query_data_with_API.r) gives an example of how using the `sevenbridges-r` R package to query data in the CGC platefrom, and copy the resulting files to your project. 

### Create your docker container

A good starting point it to run the base container on your machine (`docker run`) and then to interactively install the software you need in the container. Keep note of the commands you use and then create a Dockerfile with them. Once done try to build from your docker file using `docker build`. See the [docker tutorial](/demo_code/docker_demo.md) for more details.
